we're going to talk about medicine you
know the thing that Doogie Howser
pretended to be able to practice leading
to 92 deaths and life in prison yeah
that's how the show ended you didn't
watch long enough specifically we're
going to talk about medical devices the
modern-day miracles so that range from
contact lenses to pacemakers that keep
hearts beating to hip replacements that
can transform lives as this woman will
tell you in a solemn testimonial I was
very frightened to don't do a hip
replacement I really didn't want to do a
hip replacement and she got to hit
replacement she's better than no I can't
be a loser for that fascinating Maceo
she's dancing as if she never got a hip
replacement you know admit it you didn't
see that story ending with a
breakdancing group of 50 year olds
called and this is true moms into hood
and you're gonna be even more surprised
when I tell you they're actually here
tonight please welcome moms into her
[Applause]
we're not here you think they're coming
to a post game of thrones HBO got better
places to be it would be a waste of
their valuable time the medical device
industry is huge they constitute a 156
billion dollar market in the US and more
people have one than you might think
about 32 million Americans that's one in
10 have at least one medical device
implanted in their bodies that's right
all these years we've been waiting
anxiously for the robot apocalypse and
it turns out the robot apocalypse was
inside us the whole time and what
medical devices can undeniably do
tremendous good and save lives they can
also cause real problems and you're
probably aware of some of them thanks to
personal injury lawyer ads like these
have you or a loved one had
complications after a knee replacement
or revision surgery have you or a loved
one had hernia mesh implanted
specifically for hernia repair have you
or a loved one had an IVC filter
implanted to prevent blood clots from
reaching the lungs have you or a loved
one developed a drug resistant bacterial
infection or superbug after undergoing
an ERCP procedure using a duodenum scope
yes actually yes I do have a loved one
who's developed a drug resistant
bacterial infection or superbugs
after undergoing an ELC procedure using
a tuhoe Dina scope the card categories
at hallmark have gotten so specific I
had options on that one now what well
it's easy to roll your eyes and ads like
those the problems that they are citing
are very real medical devices can
malfunction
sometimes in horrifying fashion just
imagine a defective defibrillator
painfully shocking you multiple times or
a malfunctioning insulin pump giving you
the wrong dose well both of those things
have happened in fact a massive recent
investigation found that 80,000 more
than 80,000 deaths and 1.7 million
injuries possibly linked to medical
devices were reported to the FDA in the
past decade and while you'd naturally
assume that medical devices are
extensively tested before they're put on
the market that is not necessarily the
case even devices that go inside you may
never have been subjected to a clinical
and don't feel bad if you're suddenly
surprised by that one research have
found that many doctors aren't aware of
this either we were surprised to see how
little surgeons knew in our study about
the approval process for devices that
some of the surgeons seem to think that
well the FDA at taking care of this that
of course these devices had been tested
in humans that's terrifying even your
doctor may not know that you're
essentially being treated like a guinea
pig and nobody wants to be treated like
a guinea pig unless it means you get
your own hanging water bottle that you
can suck on from your bed which actually
sounds completely delightful to me so
tonight let's talk about how medical
devices get approved and before we start
that the nature of this story means that
there are two clips that you gonna see
that are a little gross
so before each one I'm gonna say a
safeword opossum and flashing on screen
with a sound effect like this basically
whenever you see that if you are
squeamish you will know to look away and
now that you have been fairly warned
let's begin for many years medical
devices were hardly regulated at all
instead the FDA produced sternly worded
public information messages like this
today's doctor's drugs and medical
devices truly work medical miracles for
young and old alike but there are some
as phony as a $3 bill like this Zehra
applicator for example which has claim
to cure arthritis with z rays there are
no Z rays he was right of course Z rays
wouldn't be discovered until 2011 when
they were identified as the powerful
sexual radiation emanating from Zayn
Malik who your disease feel disease
right now burrow into your soul but in
the 1970s Congress passed a law giving
the FDA the authority to approve medical
devices and you might assume that on the
basis of that every single device you
see is FDA approved but in fact far more
of them are instead something called FDA
cleared and that is a distinction with a
big difference because FDA cleared is a
much lower bar to clear you've probably
seen the phrase FDA cleared on products
like this anti aging laser treatment but
it can mean very little even the Sharks
on Shark Tank know this watch their
response when someone pitch them
an acupressure band and tried to pull
the whole fda-cleared card Iran is there
any proof that this actually works
it's an FDA cleared medical device
that's not on that cubes is right I mean
when is he not but my man cubes nailed
it again there but you saying something
is fda-cleared is in no way proof that
the device actually works it's a phrase
that can promise way more than it
delivers like when a serial describes
itself as part of a complete breakfast
that doesn't really mean anything
anything can technically be part of a
complete breakfast if you adjust it
alongside oatmeal yogurt granola fruit
salad and a glass of orange juice heroin
is part of the complete breakfast and
the way most products get cleared is
through a loophole in a system called
the 510 K pathway it wasn't actually a
bad idea when they initially came up
with it basically the FDA wouldn't make
companies go through a strenuous testing
process if their device was
substantially similar to one that had
come before that way they wouldn't
stifle innovation but it was only
supposed to apply narrowly the problem
is nowadays more than 80% of medical
devices are cleared through the 510 K
loophole including around 400 implanted
medical devices every year those the
ones that go inside your body and that
whole idea of being substantially
equivalent to devices that came before
has some real problems with it because
it can essentially become a high-stakes
game of telephone let me show you in
2008 a company called de PUE received
FDA clearance for a hip replacement
based on its substantial equivalence to
six previous devices all of which were
cleared because of their similarity to
devices before that and if I sit before
that and before that all the way back to
hips that were on the market in 1975 now
incredibly some of those devices have
since been taken off the market by their
manufacturers because of their high
failure rates but under FDA rules de PUE
could still use them as a basis for
getting their hips cleared and the thing
is depew's hip really would have
benefited from clinical testing in human
beings because there was a big problem
while it may have looked similar to his
predecessors it was crucially different
in the both its ball and socket were
made out of metal and it turns out that
when metal rubs are going
metal bad things can happen which sounds
like the tagline for a movie about a
masturbating robot yep you'll notice
that we didn't actually come up with a
funny fake name for that movie because
the perfect name for a movie about a
masturbating robot already exists and
it's chappie those metal hips began to
degrade with wear and tear and the
consequences were grim orthopedic
surgeon dr. Herbert Huddleston of
Tarzana testified at trial he's taken
out dozens of metal on metal hips that
failed in the worst cases own and the
soft tissues around the hip started look
like pieces of cheese except pitch-black
pieces of cheese sometimes we get in
there and it looks like it's filled with
old oil that you've drained from your
car before the clip sorry that wasn't a
possum that was one of them I won't I
won't miss the next one that's on me
anyway depew's parent company has since
spent more than three billion dollars to
settle thousands of lawsuits over their
metal hip implants and you feel that
this could have been avoided if an
outside agency had just had a closer eye
on what Depew was doing because the
company being you know a company was
excitedly trying to put as many of its
hips in people as possible
just watch the pew sales force
celebrates the early success of its
metal hips taking shares of business was
the theme of a Mardi Gras style parade
and a de PUE sales conference in 2008
this video shown to the jury stars deep
used then top marketing guru alongside
costumed alligators a bloody man with a
hatchet and a giant metal hip implant
you probably have a lot of questions
there and if you like me the first one
is I include an axe murderer in your
parade about medical implants I can only
assume it's a Mardi Gras themed
reference to the Axman of New Orleans a
mostly forgotten serial killer who stalk
the streets of the Big Easy in 1918
apparently threatening anyone and this
is true who wasn't enjoying jazz at Huff
that is an admirably deep cut although
if I'm honest I would have preferred
them to have put in at least as much
research into metal poisoning as they
did into early 20th century jazz loving
serial killers and it's not just the
sales force who were amped about the
success of depew's hips one of the
people who helped design it dr. Thomas
schmaltz Reid was excited too although
not entirely for the reason that you
would hope a doctor would be excited
about a new medical device because he
even made an appearance to pump up to
pew sales force at that meeting with his
special Smoltz Reid's charm did you know
that the first billion is the hardest
billion here billion there pretty soon
it adds up to some real money anyone
here want to go for two I'm gonna say
that again is anyone here want to go for
two now I know that sounds bad but I'm
sure if some of the patients who had
used his product were there they too
would have stood up and cheered and then
you know collapsed in their heat because
their hips are now pitch black cheese
and if you wonder why a doctor should be
so excited about sales deployed him 20
million dollars in royalties for his
role in helping to design their hips
including a cut of every sale and if I
may paraphrase a deeply smarmy man 20
million here 20 million there pretty
soon that adds up to some real money
but but but I will say this for metal on
metal hips at least they can be removed
it's not easy and it's sometimes
dangerous but it can be done it is much
harder to do that with certain types of
surgical mesh another FDA cleared device
very basically mesh is implanted in the
tissue which then heals around it
sealing it in which can make it risky to
take out without damaging the
surrounding tissue and organs meshes
were initially cleared by the FDA for
hernias but a few years back they were
also cleared for use on vaginal tissue
in many cases without having had to
undergo any clinical trials and things
did not go well and ahead of the next
clip
I am going to say a person not not
because you're about to see anything
gross but because of what you're about
to hear it felt like a cheese grater
inside of me it felt like the material
was pulling on the muscles and I'd get
shooting pains
you almost felt like there was something
inside of you that was like sandpaper
back and forth every time you'd walk
that is obviously horrifying
there is absolutely no circumstance in
which you should feel like there is
sandpaper in your groin apart of course
from when a cat is going down on you
that's the only time that's the only
time and even then even then there are
real problems involved even there
they're good to take it down take it
down the good news is the good news is
that the FDA recently ordered vaginal
mesh manufacturers to stop selling their
product and as for metal on metal hips
going forward they won't be FDA cleared
instead they'll have to go through the
much more rigorous process that gets you
FDA approved it requires that a high
risk device be tested on humans which is
great but even the approval system has
its problems for one thing the FDA
relies on manufacturers to do their own
clinical testing and those tests can be
very limited and for just one example of
the approval system shortcomings look at
ashore metal coils that were marketed as
permanently implanted birth control
devices for women assures manufacturer
in his application for FDA approval
claimed that 99% of women in their
clinical study
he's rated their comfort with the device
as good - excellent and the FDA approved
it and yet 15 years later the FDA had
received over 32,000 reports of problems
with ashore including pain dislocation
of the device genital hemorrhage and
perforated organs none of which really
sound particularly good or excellent -
Mickey and if you're having trouble
squaring that with the sky high
satisfaction rating is yours clinical
studies some of the participants in it
say there may be a reason for that the
first time I saw the questioned rates
your comfort of wearing the device I
said what does this mean I'm not wearing
anything this is something that's
implanted inside of my body the nurse
said can you feel it and I said I can
feel pain in my abdomen where that pain
is coming from I don't know
and she said then you need a raid it is
excellent they would say are you happy
with the product I would say no and they
would say but you're not pregnant I
don't see correct well then then it's
doing its job so you have to be happy
with that okay but just because
something is technically fulfilling its
job does not mean you have to be happy
with it
Pennywise technically fulfills all the
requirements of a birthday clown but
when you book him for your kid's fifth
birthday party and it doesn't go well
you should not be obliged to rate him as
excellence so I guess that the big
question here is how can you know if a
device is potentially harmful and
unfortunately good information is
actually very difficult to find for
start one estimate suggested less than
half of 1% of medical device failures
are even reported to the FDA which when
you think about it is genuinely
remarkable a hundred percent of rude
waiters are reported to Yelp and those
aren't killing anybody
in fact public reporting of issues with
devices is so bad many patients have
been forced to learn about problems in
less than ideal ways like from that
alarmingly alert woman in a law firm
commercial or often even Facebook a
couple of months ago the FDA held
hearings to alert women to potential
issues with breast implants but for
years and years
and yes before that women were finding
out simply by warning one another about
it online the private group is called
breast implant illness and healing by
Nicole and today it has more than 79
thousand members I was like this is
unbelievable that this can happen with
so many people page after page that's my
story that's my story everyone has the
same symptoms yeah they found out
through Facebook groups traditionally
the least reliable source of information
right below horoscopes Infowars and a
mole person screaming in the subway
tunnels but this system clearly needs
reform and don't just take that from me
eight years ago the Institute of
Medicine actually called for an end to
the 510k loophole you know the one that
hips and mesh went through saying it
should be replaced by a regulatory
framework based on sound science and
that framework does not need to be so
strict that innovation is stifled just
not so lacks that people are getting
needlessly hurt at the very least you
would hope that implanted devices would
undergo clinical testing before being
put inside of you but but any any time
that meaningful reforms have been
suggested device manufacturers have
lobbied hard and helped defeat them
because of course they have any changes
would mean they would have to work
harder and nobody wants to work harder
you think we like doing these heavily
research stories you think this was fun
for us
HBO makes us do this if it was actually
up to us we'd work one day a week and
every segment would be two minutes long
and have a title like pillows and how
they are soft bye bye
but look that would be fun but until our
current system is improved unfortunately
patients have to be their own advocates
and experts advise researching any
implanted device and asking questions
like is there an alternative can the
device be removed if something goes
wrong and how long has the device been
on the market because just because
something is new does not necessarily
mean it is better or even that it's been
tested the point here is our medical
device system needs serious attention
and until it is fixed it would be nice
if people were alerted to the flaws with
our process with the same urgency with
which they're alerted to the flaws with
our devices attention if you or a loved
one are thinking about getting an
implanted medical device you may want to
listen the up because it turns out
the FDA is so far up medical device
manufacturers asses you can only locate
them with a duo D no scope and thanks to
that manufacturers are getting rich
doctors are getting rich and patients
are getting their insights turned into
oil and cheese sorry opossum you and
your loved ones need to know it can take
years before the public finds out about
problems with a new device and in the
meantime your best source of information
may be Facebook and the only
thing you should ever learn from
Facebook is which of your friends has
the ugliest baby its grace
so act now to protect yourself before
it's too late
basically treat medical devices like
guys who have played Batman some are
great but new ones aren't necessarily
better and there are a few you
definitely don't want to let inside your
body and if hearing about duodenal
scopes and sandpaper vaginas has made
you uncomfortable as long as it hasn't
made you pregnant I'm afraid you have to
rate your experience as excellent
you